---
title: Making decisions is the way to move ahead
layout: post
date: 2022-12-28
tags: personal
permalink: making-decisions-is-the-way-to-move-ahead
---
<p style="color: rgb(26, 26, 26)" class="body"><span>I feel stagnant in many ways. Same way of thinking about jobs. Same way of thinking about relationships. Still, the same fears control me. It is because I’ve been very indecisive in the last few years. I have not made decisions early on and committed to them. Infact I have often delated delayed decisions till the very end (because I was unsure or I couldn’t find the best option) and lost opportunities or money because of that. Not filling the form for vaccination, not booking flight on time, not giving an early yes for a plan, not being able to decide what hobbies to develop and what to quit. Indecisiveness keeps you exactly where you are. Controlled by the fear of trade-off you end up doing nothing and achieving nothing. By not making a decision you stay still. And that itself is painful. Nonetheless by letting things as they are you are eventually handed a trade-off and which is worse than it would have been had you chosen something (anything). By taking bigger decisions, by changing the way you do simple things, you can change the way you live your life. You can feel like life is moving very fast. By re-evaluating all old things -- old patterns of thinking, old methods of doing things etc and trying to integrate new things, you’ll develop the skill to take bold decisions and life will feel like moving ahead. </span></p><p class="body"><span>I make lists of things I can do. Courses I can take, companies I can apply to but don’t follow through. They remain in my to-do forever until they have expired and I no longer need to do them. Instead I should actively pursue things I want to do. Spend very less time on planning or ideating and most of the time on executing and getting experience of doing that thing.</span></p><p class="body"><span><strong><em>In a world of complete freedom, no constraints and infinite possibilities, pick your constraints and move fast</em></strong></span></p><p class="body"></p>