---
title: The Dip
layout: post
date: 2023-11-23
tags: book
permalink: the-dip
---

Skipping through the pages of rewards of being exceptional which we all know.

One paragraph I liked was highlighting how school and college differ from real world. Also in Andresson Horowitz interview. 

Well roundedness at school. Good at everything. Not having a major flaw

Investing in strength vs lack of weakness

The world rewards exceptionalism in one thing at the cost of everything else.

It is scary and disheartening to read however since being the best is promoted to such an extent that it feels that life is a waste if you are not striving for that. And everyone knows how difficult the path the expertise is. Just thinking of walking on that path feels scary. 

Stuff like - quit if you are not going to be the best. 

The book describes three curves to decide what paths are worth striving for
* The dip
* The cul de sac
* The cliff

Anything worth doing is either a dip or cul de sac. 

Important message of this book is to get off the cul de sac and try for the dip. That leads to exceptionalism. 
I don’t really understand it still now.

Quitting early is promoted. If you know you are not gonna have time to invest in something just quit. 

Seeing the curve in advance. If it’s cul de sav then get off that curve. I don’t understand that in reference to relationships. How do you know that relationship looks like cul de sac? Okay break up. But still I don’t think you can see the curve of a relationship before hand. Cul de sac careers are easier to identify -- you see others at that place and how they are progressing. For sports / music etc field the dip is the only possible curve. For knowledge careers I don’t think you can identify dip in a career path. Maybe you want to hone your skills until you become the best.

However this is one way of living life. Some people might like a good package of everything. Without significantly sacrificing on any big thing. I feel like a good package could also be a good thing (atleast later in life you would not have a major part of your life missing). I will however accept that I wrote the above paragraph with fear and insecurity of never becoming someone good. I’ll be honest.

The dip refers to the filter that decides people who stick and people who quit. With time I am convinced that everything in this world is effort.

Capability and skill is not the only difficult thing. Choice is even more difficult.

The book mentions this quote by ultramarathoner Dick Collins

Decide before the race the conditions that will cause you to stop and drop out. You don’t want to be out there saying, “Well gee, my leg hurts, I’m a little dehydrated, I’m sleepy, I’m tired, and it’s cold and windy.” And talk yourself into quitting. If you are making a decision based on how you feel at that moment, you will probably make the wrong decision.
