---
title: From Simi Valley To Silicon Valley
layout: post
date: 2023-07-25
tags: notes
permalink: from-simi-valley-to-silicon-valley
---
<ul><li><p class="body"><span>Generally, these techie types are relegated to the back office, where they work on the core information technology services that support the rest of the company. We types are often seen and not heard.</span></p></li><li><p class="body"><span>But, first, I had to hone the confidence to share the technologist’s point of view in all aspects of business.</span></p></li><li><p class="body"><span>Because of this and so many other events in my life, I’ve learned that serendipity is about much more than just being in the right place at the right time. Far more importantly, it requires a flexible, open mindset and a willingness to take some risk. It is only with this that we can allow unexpected people and circumstances to come into our life and transform it.</span></p></li><li><p class="body"><span>You can try to map out every minute detail of your life, which might get you from Point A to Point B. But, in the process of sticking to a rigidly structured map, you may very well miss out on detours you don’t even know exist; in gaming we call these side quests. Often, it is along these unanticipated detours that the most profound and unexpected joy and growth await. The most profound things can happen when you are willing to put yourself in situations that allow room for serendipity to do its thing. This might include everything from meeting someone special to signing up for a new challenge at work. Most of the important things in life require a certain amount of effort on your part, but they also involve an undeniable element of alchemy.</span></p></li><li><p class="body"><span>This is particularly important when it comes to those you love the most. Sometimes it is much easier to be patient and compassionate with strangers than with those we are closest to. Always remember that those who love you the most are the most deserving of the best version of you.</span></p></li><li><p class="body"><span>You have the character we want, and we can train you on the rest.</span></p></li><li><p class="body"><span>As if the professional opportunities weren’t enough, the Silicon Valley social scene during the dot-com boom was fascinating too. There were always great dinners and parties, as well as invites to all of the venture capital events, which spared no expense. Everyone was getting funding to go build all of these new startup companies, and there were opportunities galore to accelerate your learning. I was constantly working on huge, complex IT systems, networks, business applications, and deployments that I would never have encountered until a decade or more into my career had I arrived on the scene at any previous point in history. The hallmark of those years was dramatic acceleration and exposure. It felt like every three months of learning and work experience was equivalent to three years in any other era. I was a sponge and tried to learn as much as I could.</span></p></li></ul>