---
title: How to Do Great Work [Essay]
layout: post
date: 2023-07-18
tags: misc
permalink: how-to-do-great-work-essay
---
<p style="color: rgb(26, 26, 26)" class="body"><span>Link to the original essay by Paul Graham - </span><span><a target="_blank" href="http://www.paulgraham.com/greatwork.html">http://www.paulgraham.com/greatwork.html</a></span></p><p style="color: rgb(26, 26, 26)" class="body"><span>Consciously cultivate your taste in the work done in your field. Until you know which is the best and what makes it so, you don't know what you're aiming for. And that is what you're aiming for, because if you don't try to be the best, you won't even be good</span></p><p class="body"><span>Fortunately there's a kind of economy of scale here. Though it might seem like you'd be taking on a heavy burden by trying to be the best, in practice you often end up net ahead. It's exciting, and also strangely liberating. It simplifies things. In some ways it's easier to try to be the best than to try merely to be good.</span></p><p class="body"><span>The temptation to be someone else is greatest for the young. They often feel like nobodies. But you never need to worry about that problem, because it's self-solving if you work on sufficiently ambitious projects. If you succeed at an ambitious project, you're not a nobody; you're the person who did it. So just do the work and your identity will take care of itself.</span></p><p class="body"><span>Take as much risk as you can afford. In an efficient market, risk is proportionate to reward, so don't look for certainty, but for a bet with high expected value. If you're not failing occasionally, you're probably being too conservative. Though conservatism is usually associated with the old, it's the young who tend to make this mistake. Inexperience makes them fear risk, but it's when you're young that you can afford the most.</span></p><p class="body"><span>The sooner you overcome this passivity, the better. If you're still in school, try thinking of your education as your project, and your teachers as working for you rather than vice versa. That may seem a stretch, but it's not merely some weird thought experiment. It's the truth, economically, and in the best case it's the truth intellectually as well. The best teachers don't want to be your bosses. They'd prefer it if you pushed ahead, using them as a source of advice, rather than being pulled by them through the material.</span></p><p class="body"></p>